Today is April 30th, 1984.
I'm interviewing Norman Borlaug at 4 p.m., Texas A&M University.
This is a test.
Okay, you run into problems.
You run into problems about how do you get a factory, a plant established to produce these things?
There you ran again into the order of priorities.
What's the priority of this versus that?
for a different branch of the armed forces or within the same branch.
When DuPont saw that it had a broad coverage of insects also, they were interested, obviously, not only the immediate for the armed forces, but looking ahead to have something that would be useful in peacetime.
So they tried to get approval for establishing commercial
operation, no go.
And so they, in the semi work, not enough, probably a whole series of things, not enough background data, no one was really convinced how good it was out there in the field.
And then secondly, everybody's scrambling for something more important, the chemical equipment to run the reactions, to set up a special plan.
And so it was, they started cooking it up
and pretty crewed out in some semi-works in the old Grisele department's work in Cleveland, Ohio.
In a few weeks' time, first a few small samples to make sure that it was toxic to insects, it was checked against a number of them.
We also checked it on plants, and it'd kill everything.
because it was full of other isomers.
We didn't have good equipment to control the reactions and yet it was a very effective insecticide so they started cooking it up and about every week I think it was or every later I think it was down to every three days when a new bomber was leaving from this for the South Pacific.
they would put in the 200 pounds I think was the maximum we were producing at that time in this and it was taken over and then diluted over there depending on how it was used whether it was added to solvents and used around and all the puddles where the where the malarial mosquitoes were probably used in many ways also dust
I never saw the field operations, but it did a lot to cut back on disease.
And as I say, that original crude product must have been a mixture of a lot of things.
If the FDA or if the EPA had looked at it today, they never let it go onto the market, even for the military.
That shows how
The order of priorities changed with our fluency.
What are the benefits against risk?
There were all kinds of these kinds of problems.
Even some that were hard to believe.
One day, I'm not sure I should put this on the tape.
Yes, you should.
They even had bad bombers.
I mean, they've had all kinds, and they've had balloons and all kinds of different types of experiments, and it's all public record now.
Well, this had to do, not with anything of that kind, but somebody from quartermasters came in one day, another big box, and said, look at this, would you use these?
He opened it up, and it was a box full of condoms.
Really?
Just covered with black molds, green molds, and all kinds of molds on the outside of the envelopes that they were in.
And you opened them up, and they were also very often moldy.
And before they opened, they said, don't laugh.
This is serious business.
Really?
We've got a lot of our soldiers down.
with venereal diseases of both kinds, the really severe one and also the more common one.
And they said, would you use these?
And of course there was some chuckling, but it was serious because of the numbers of people that perked.
So, mold was growing on top?
They wouldn't use them because the molds were there.
You'd say, hell, that's worse than nothing.
So, they wouldn't use them.
They'd become infected.
So, the problem says... So, would you have to do some kind of a packaging?
Packaging.
So, we had... So, mold wouldn't grow on the packages themselves.
On the packaging.
But as far as prophylactic were concerned... No, that was all right.
Yeah, it was all right anyway because it was inside the package.
Right.
So, it was air tightened so that the molds weren't in there.
And so we had packages all over in that jungle room.
It looked like a Christmas tree.
It's kind of embarrassing with all these young girls around there as technicians.
You'd hear them go in and hear them chuckling.
I remember the first morning when the girls came in, I put them all up over a weekend.
We worked with the cellophane division, making all kinds of packaging, different plastics and different metallic covers and different kinds of seals.
I had them all put up over a weekend.
We used to work all hours at that time.
That was part of the responsibility.
We had these things pouring in, and we only had three of us.
And so before the technicians came in that morning, I told this bacteriologist who was a middle-aged woman, considerably older than I was at that time, that had worked with Bachman, Betty Horning.
This looks pretty horrible in there.
She was a married woman.
I said, you better explain this to these young girls, because if I do it, I won't be very comfortable, and I think you can do it there.
And so she rounded him up, apparently, and explained what this was all about.
For a couple of days, every time they'd open that door and go in, I'd hear them giggling in there.
But the soldiers wouldn't use these because they were moldy on the, as far as wrappers were concerned.
But they were perfectly good inside.
Perfectly, okay.
So I suppose we had a tremendous increase in the amount of mineral disease.
Sure.
We're soon to have that one fixed pretty soon.
Yeah, I bet you that had top priority then, didn't it?
Yes.
Sure did.
Now, they probably didn't experience those same problems over that type of mold in Europe, did they?
No, I would imagine that the environmental conditions weren't right in Europe.
It wasn't so human.
What kind of baggage was it?
I mean, was it some kind of a fabric?
No, in the beginning they just had paper and they had some of the sealing agents didn't
None of the sealing agents had fungicide or bactericides in them.
And so the molds would frequently grow on the starch binding agents that were in the seals.
It was kind of a culture medium.
But we soon decided that in that particular case, we had to do something.
Ah, that's where cellulose acetate in part came into the picture.
I'd forgotten the one that the molds wouldn't grow on.
It's like cellophane, but it has the acetate part of the molecule.
And the moles wouldn't grow on it.
And that you could seal with heat.
I'd forgotten what we did that for.
That's interesting.
I'm surprised that they didn't use some kind of a, I'm surprised that they used paper.
Something to deal with paper.
Well, you couldn't get anything.
Yeah, because of the priorities.
Priorities, yeah.
Hmm.
That is interesting.
How about water purification?
Well, they had certain, and again, I've forgotten the time.
Betty Horning was a specialist in this, because before she took her doctorate with Waxman out at Rutgers, she had worked for several years when her husband, he was also a DuPont employee in the cellophane division, chemist.
But she was a trained microbiologist, bacteriologist.
She had done a lot of work with the company that made the equipment to chlorinate public drinking water system.
She had a vast amount of experience, so she was brought in.
We had certain guidelines.
The military said you have to have a disinfection that will work in, I think it was five minutes.
The concentration has to be high enough so that it'll work in five minutes.
In other words, you fill your canteen, maybe the guy will wait five minutes.
This way I remember it, five minutes.
Anyway, it was a very short period of time, so you'd have to go through dilutions and different chemicals and whatnot.
And we had at that time also, as all of this work was going on, to the best of our ability, we had a toxicological laboratory, but obviously you couldn't run tests like they do today that you run repeatedly over months and years of time to come up with some general conclusion.
What was happening meanwhile?
That was the basis.
And you'd make some, the best test you could with rapid judgment.
That's why I think I get up pretty tight when I hear all of the tremendous tests that go on now to evaluate toxicity and carcinogenicity and teratogenicity of compounds.
And one other great thing that has happened since then that's confused rather than enlightened,
the way these results are put out to the general public.
At that time, for most compounds, the analytical procedures, if you could measure one part per 100,000, it was good.
Of course, today, one part per billion you can measure very easily, or a fraction of a part per billion, or one part per trillion.
Really?
You can measure it that well, one part per trillion?
Well, let's say several parts per trillion.
But one part per billion you can measure.
And this means that, for example, in many of the toxicants, including some which are known to be carcinogenic in certain levels, they are present in the plants that we have been using from way back before written history.
They are there.
We've been using them, but at the levels that they are
present in our food they're apparently innocuous although maybe so small but maybe with time we'll find out that some of them are weak well we know some of them are carcinogenic at certain levels in test animals it's sort of bewildering and frightening to me now having worked for all of these years in control of diseases of our main crop plants that
There exists on the record, under the Food and Drug Administration Act, a clause which is commonly known as GRAS, G-R-A-S, generally recognized as safe.
And an improved variety of crop plants that's put out as disease resistant falls under that category.
It's never been
question so far as to why it's resistant.
Almost certainly there's something in there that's toxic to the primary pathogen that normally attacks that crop species, let's say the rust fungus.
And then under this gloss called the Delaney gloss, which was hooked on in 1958, I believe it was,
to the Food and Drug Administration General Act that's controlled additives in food, or now it's interpreted also as contaminants in food.
Thirty-seven words.
It was hooked on an appropriation bill in the last hours or so before Congress was closing, which says, in effect, paraphrasing,
Any compound that's added to foods, which in any quantity can be shown to be carcinogenic, when used on experimental animals with appropriate procedures, whether given orally or by injection, has to be banned.
It's not a question of judgment.
That's the responsibility of the administrator of the Food and Drug Act.
Well, this is the one that's led to all of this furore that we read about now that something is removed because the issue boils down as to what is a reasonable, what is a reasonable risk.
And I see unless that this is modified, it won't be too long before somebody says, look, that new variety you have put out,
has to have something toxic in it.
It's probably carcinogenic and it's up to you to prove that it's not before you can have this variety released for distribution to protect the farmer's crop.
We don't even know what the compounds are, much less the quantities that are in them.
And so this probably explains why I feel so frustrated with some of these
judgments that I feel are over-exaggerated, simplified procedures in banning the use of certain things.
It started all out with DDT, if you will remember.
Yeah, but we're going to get to this.
But it goes all down through cyclamates and the whole gamut of things into the most recent one was ethylene dibromide.
about two months ago.
Well, dioxins are a part of this.
Now, some of them aren't added as the Delaney clause was specifically drafted to say as food additives, but they are contaminants, whether it's as a pesticide or whether it comes in in some other way.
Well, let's get back to the war.
I want to ask you another question about the war because we are going to cover all of that.
And that is, you know, during the war, it was a tremendous...
tremendous period of American patriotism and to be in uniform was, well, every account I read was the thing.
And did you ever feel that you were sort of out of the mainstream because you weren't in the service?
Yes.
I think that this was definitely the case, especially when I would travel to go to military laboratories or installations, the Quartermaster Depot or down to
Washington, on different occasions, talking about this is the product that looks like it might solve at the quartermaster general's office or whatever the agency of the armed forces was that we were dealing with.
You felt sort of out of place.
While you were back at DuPont, it wasn't necessarily so, because there were a considerable number of military-aged scientists
that were under war manpower control just as I was.
We couldn't leave because that had a higher priority than going into the Army as a private, as far as our War Manpower Commission is concerned.
But it was kind of a nasty feeling.
Which leads me to the next question then.
If you couldn't join the service,
And you were supposed to stay in DuPont.
How did you leave?
Before the war was over.
How did you get down to Mexico, which was the next part of your career?
I suppose it was in... When the American Phytopathological Society was holding their annual meeting, it was in Philadelphia that year, which is only a stone's throw from Wilmington, Delaware, where I was based with the DuPont Company.
And I don't remember the month of the year.
It may have been October or the fall of the year, at least.
So one afternoon after work, I went down, or maybe at midday even.
The pond company may have told me to go.
I don't remember.
But anyway, I was there in the afternoon.
And as the session broke up, someone came to me.
who turned out to be Dr. J.G.
George Harrar, whom I had not known at Minnesota.
He had left, finished his doctor, under Dr. Stakeman, while I was an undergraduate, so I hadn't known him.
I knew a lot about him because he was quite a famous personality around the graduate school.
And he said, look, how about joining our staff?
We're just getting ready to start a
Foreign Technical Agricultural Program January 1 of 73.
Yeah, 73.
And I say, I can't.
I'm under war manpower.
43, excuse me.
Only off by 40 years.
I can't.
I'm under war manpower.
Until I'm released for more manpower, I have no choice.
I stay here, and this is in lieu of military service.
And if I break my part of the good faith that I should go, then I'll be put in the military.
But I said, I'm interested.
I'd like to know something about it.
And he very generally explained this program.
And I guess we're going to talk about how this came to be at some point here in this interview.
So I simply told him that I can't.
But I'd be interested to, once I'm released, I don't know whether I'll stay at DuPont Company.
They've been very kind to me.
But there were certain things.
It wasn't all gravy on this war manpower thing.
For example, the new people who came into my staff, by the time I was released, more manpower.
For example, Betty Horning, this woman, and another person who had a 4F.
Their salary was twice as much as I was getting, who was director of the laboratory.
And this was big.
This was understandable because all salaries were frozen as of Pearl Harbor Day.
And the only increases that were permitted was if you worked more hours.
I think once we went from whatever it was, 40 to 48 hours.
So they were controlled by the Office of Price Administration.
That whole thing.
Federal government, sure.
Federal government.
Everybody.
Yeah.
And so, and then I also, by then I'd looked around in this company and I'd worked on, in some of their plant operation where they had biological problems and their paint division and their lactic acid.
They used to produce lactic acid for,
for food by fermentation and I thought that was kind of a primitive operation and I saw lots of things that I would like to have been involved in and I saw the field opening up on antibiotics before it really got big and I tried to get the DuPont company to get interested in this whole penicillin thing was just opening up.
DuPont was never in pharmaceuticals but
Anything that showed biological activity in our kinds of tests for industrial purposes was automatically through some arrangement with Abbott chemicals, pharmaceutical, would be tested by them in small samples.
But I didn't feel that this was a very good arrangement with the field opening up in antibiotics.
Since I knew a lot about microorganisms and since most of these new ones were in the field of
where fungal activity was involved and especially since we had Betty Horning who had just finished her doctorate thesis with Selmer Wachsman at Rutgers who was one of the authorities and produced several of the really famous or was producing them at that time.
I thought we had a natural good position but they figured that
With the limited manpower, we weren't in any position to do this.
So I was kind of frustrated by these things and yet recognized that under the circumstances, you couldn't expect the company to do anything about this at that time.
So long came, I've forgotten when it was, July or August 1st, somewhere in there.
of 73.
43.
I seem to simply add the seven.
I got a notice from, or rather my directors got a notice, that I and several other people of military age were being released by war and manpower.
It didn't show on the
This was not played up in the public press, but this was obvious.
And we had seen for several weeks before that military contracts that we had sort of been acting as technical consultants for in the military operations, whether it was with camouflage paints or with many of these things I've mentioned, suddenly they didn't call us anymore.
There were no more production.
They apparently had enough produced.
They could see the end of the war coming as far as procurement was concerned.
But it was several weeks after that before a notice came down that we were released from war manpower.
Already in 43?
That seems kind of early, doesn't it?
No, wait a little.
I'm off a year.
44.
Excuse me, 44.
Yeah, seems kind of strange.
July 1st, July 1st, or... So it's after D-Day.
After... Yeah, which is June 6th, and the Japanese are moving backwards, too.
They're withdrawing, yeah.
Yes, yeah.
And... So then I...
Herrar contacted me again.
He was in New York for budget meeting.
And he hadn't talked to you then for about a year.
That's right.
And he said, can you come up to New York?
And I should have said that the foundation, before this, after that first meeting, Herrar came down and one of the
the head of the Natural Science Division of the Foundation came down and talked to DuPont about whether I could be released, and they were told in no uncertain terms that no one could be released under these circumstances to go, no matter how high a priority this may affect.
And if you would have been released, you probably would have been drafted.
Exactly.
And this was made very clear, and rightfully so.
So then, more than a year later, this would have been whatever it was, December until a year and a half later.
Then the notice came down, and apparently this was noticed by Herrera when he was in New York, and he called and he said, can you come up?
And so we had never had any vacation all during these days.
four years, so I took a half a day off or whatever it was and went up.
And they asked me whether I would be interested in joining this program.
And I said, well, I'll have to think about it.
At that time, there was only one other person who had just then been hired, Dr. Wellhausen.
Herrar, the chief in Wellhausen.
I said, well, I'll have to talk to my wife and think about it for a while, which I did.
And so I decided to, after cogitating, first I talked to my superiors in Dupont.
I said, this has come, inquiry whether I'd be interested.
And I said, I'm kind of interested because of the fact that
I'm not sure where I'm going to fit in this chemical company.
I'm one of the few microbiologists that's here in this big chemical company.
And what kind of future do I have?
I'm not sure that there's much here for me because the agricultural chemicals was still not developed at that time.
It was just in its infancy.
And the director of research called me into his office and he said, look,
He says, you've done a good job here, not on what you were hired for, but we want you to feel comfortable.
And if you feel that way, considering how you've worked, and they actually showed me that I was one of two cases in DuPont where we had been at the same salary from pre-Pearl Harbor with no adjustments.
There were two of us that was sent as test cases to war manpower and they were told in both cases, no, we don't make any exceptions because this is the way it has to be.
As soon as we start making exceptions, no matter how well justified, then the fence is down.
I knew about this.
They said, recognizing this and
They pulled out the letters again to confirm that I had not read the letters, but my immediate chief had told me about it.
That this is the way they felt, and that if I felt this way about being inadequate in chemistry, having worked at this salary scale
for this time and lots of extra hours.
They would give me two afternoons a week at company expense to go to the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, it's only about 30 months away, to take additional chemistry work.
And that put me in a worse dilemma because I thought it was very fair.
And so then, what to do?
And so I called my
ex-professor Dr. Easy's statement one night, and I said, I explained both sides of this issue to him, and I said, what do I do?
He says, Norm, and he knew me pretty well, he says, I think you should have a good look
at that Mexican thing.
This is a new operation.
There's never been one like it before.
You've got the right combination of broad background here from the farm to forestry to chemical industry, plant pathology, genetics.
He said this kind of background that we need in the early pioneers, this kind of a program combined with the personality to get along with people.
I said, I don't know a word of Spanish, I've never seen Mexico.
He says, well, I'll tell you one thing, even though you don't know him well, Dr. George Harar is one of the best students that I ever had contact with, and he knows how to make things happen, and if he offers you this job,
I think you should go because I think this thing is going to go."
And he says, as a matter of fact, I was one of the three who made that survey and I was chairman of that feasibility study that was made in Mexico that decided to recommend to the foundation to establish such a program.
And so I left DuPont and the last days of
October, or the last days of September, and drove to Mexico.
My wife, Jeannie, who was a year a little older than that, stayed in Wilmington.
Your daughter?
Yes.
Because Margaret was pregnant and expecting another youngster soon.
I remember vividly driving down the Shenandoah Valley in
These last days, the color was early that year, the beautiful foliage colors, which reminded me of my forestry days in New England.
It was a beautiful drive.
When I crossed the border into the unknown world of Mexico, I was met there and drove on down to Mexico City.
That's where I spent, in one way or another, the next 40 years of my life.
frustrations in the early years were very great before we could see progress.
I often wondered why I was so stupid to accept the job because I couldn't see any progress at all during the first three or four years, only problems everywhere.
Frustrations, inability to handle the language,
all kinds of things, no equipment.
We couldn't buy cultural problems.
We couldn't buy any scientific equipment, wasn't available because the war was in its waning days, but nonetheless was still there.
And so that's how I got to Mexico.
I was the last one who was hired to the post without ever seeing the job first.
Wellhausen and I were the only two, and we stayed longer than any of the others.
So you had three people there basically when you were hired?
There was another one hired about the same time, Bill Caldwell, agronomist, soil scientist, but he only stayed less than a year.
And so I worked with both Wellhausen and he and with Arrar.
I was a kind of a jack of all trades in those early times and master of none until I was permanently assigned to the wheat program about a year later.
Okay, well let's stop here and we have to start talking.
Remember where we were?
We were just at the beginning.
I should start out.
Today is May 2nd, 1984.
Right.
Norman Borlaug and I are talking about how the Rockefeller Foundation got involved with food production, the Mexican government, which really is a question dealing with the rise of the foreign technical assistance programs in the United States.
That's about where we should start today because we were right at the junction last time where you went down to Mexico.
Okay, it has its origins in
1940 in 19 the December 1st 1940 Henry A. Wallace president or vice president elect under Franklin D. Roosevelt yeah was asked to represent the US government at the inauguration inaugural ceremonies the incoming president of Mexico Manuel Avila Camacho you will remember that
Wallace had served two terms as Secretary of Agriculture, and he came from a strong agricultural background of editor, the Wallace farmer and publisher, which was at Farm Weekly.
In addition, he was the founder of the Pioneer Hybrid Seed Company, which later also went into hybrid chicks and a lot of other crops.
So he was well known for his
abilities knowledge in agriculture following the ceremonies he was invited to visit the old parts of Mexico where agriculture goes back to colonial times and maybe even beyond to the Aztec or before the invitation was made through incoming secretary of agriculture Martieri Gomez who was a agronomist but mostly on the side of the social aspects of agriculture
and the outgoing president, Lázaro Cárdenas.
Both of these people are deceased at present.
It's Wallace, of course.
And they traveled the countryside for several days, especially in the Bahía region, in the high valleys.
And they requested from the US government an assistance to train young Mexican scientists.
establish network of agricultural experiment stations to do basic or to do research necessary to increase production yield on the three basic food crops corn wheat and beans.
This request was made personally to Wallace but formally after the trip in Mexico City in the presence of U.S.
Ambassador Joseph Daniels
this is some of this background but perhaps not in this detail is available in that book written by a statement Bradfield and Mangelsdorf Conquest Campaigns Against Hunger okay and there's Harvard Press and I think there's at least one copy over in the library there may be I'm not sure of that but it will give some of the early period
I'm giving a bit more detail.
Howard Press 1967.
Yeah.
So he took this under consideration.
He went back to Washington.
In order to put it into perspective you have to remember that the war clouds of World War II were already on the horizon.
Yeah.
The reserve officers were being called up.
Wallace recognized that there would have to be a special appropriations bill for such a program to go through Congress and it wasn't likely it would happen with the war on the horizon and especially with reserve officers quite a few of them agricultural scientists being called called up and so shortly later he talked to the president then of the Rockefeller Foundation
Dr. Raymond Fosdick.
And he said, this request has come.
I don't think that the US government can respond to it under the present situation.
And perhaps it's better that you, as a foundation, should in any case for two reasons.
One, you have worked for 25 years with quite a number of governments.
I think it was something on the order of 25 different governments and developing countries, especially tropics and subtropics, on diseases, human diseases.
You've sent out a number of MDs who are specialized specialists in vector-borne diseases.
You've sent out medical entomologists who know a lot about the vectors, and you've sent out sanitation engineers for setting up purified water systems and sewage disposal, and you've had considerable influence.
And you know how to operate with governments, which we wouldn't have that, and
addition you're apolitical so he said I think you should look into this and so I'm not sure exactly how many weeks later but the next summer in 71 Dr. E.C.
Stakeman who was the professor 41 I keep saying 70 Dr. E.C.
Stakeman
who was professor of plant pathology and had an international reputation was also a great linguist this was why he sort of headed the thing because he spoke Spanish he visited Mexico many times collecting rust specimens that infect our grain crops here in the states he'd done that for 20 years or more and Dr. Paul Mangelsdorf who originally was a corn scientist here at Texas A&M but shortly before that had gone to Harvard as the director of the botanical library
scientist of great repute also and it has a geneticist and plant breeder and then Dr. Richard Bradfield a soil agronomist specialist then head of the department of soils and agronomy at Cornell University originally from Ohio State they were the three who went to Mexico and they stayed I think about three months in the summer of 41 and made the survey
It was pretty primitive, as you can see from some of those pictures in that book that I've referred to.
They got back, wrote the report, and they suggested that the Rockefeller Foundation look into establishing a small program, sending out a few scientists in the basic disciplines that affected production of those crops.
The program was launched with Dr. J. G. Harrar.
in early 1943, and Dr. Wellhausen was the second person who joined that staff.
He was a corn breeder.
Let me say that Herrera was originally trained at Oberlin in general biology, took his master's degree at Iowa State in ecology, I believe, and then he's a doctorate in plant pathology under Dr. Stakeman in Minnesota.
He went to University of Puerto Rico and taught botany, and so he was fluent in Spanish.
Later he moved on to become head of the Department of Plant Pathology at VPI, Virginia Polytech, and then Washington State, and he came from Washington State to the Rockefeller program as the director, and Dr. Wellhausen
was born in Oklahoma before it was a state, I think, or about that time, and they moved to Idaho, grew up on an irrigated farm there, studied at the University of Idaho, and took his doctorate and mastered and doctored at Iowa State, a very good corn breeder.
He came to Mexico from West Virginia.
He had previously been on the corn program in Montana,
then Virginia then Mexico.
Bill Caldwell joined shortly before I did he was an agronomy and soil scientist but he stayed very only a short period and went back and I joined in 43 after I was released from war.
No 44.
44 excuse me the program started in 43.
Yeah now tell me about the program
Tell me about the program.
What did they, what were the very first things that they did before you got there?
First of all, the corn program.
Is it function?
Yeah, it's going.
In the corn program, let me remove some of that garbage.
No, that's okay.
In the corn program, the first thing Dr. Wellhausen did was to, he got some young people
students who were assigned to him or they were recent graduates and he sent them out to collect all of the types of corn on farms or in markets that he could find, all of the diverse types.
Now tell me about, were these Mexican students, they were graduates from like the University of Mexico or a technical... The program was perceived as a training program in part and so young graduates fresh out of school, many had never worked on the land.
They came from urban families.
were assigned to us by the Mexican government, and sometimes their basic salary was paid by the Mexican Department of Agriculture sometime out of our direct budget.
These young people, Wellhausen sent out to collect corn, he worked with them as best he could, with the limitations on time, because you had to start lots of things at the same time.
Herrera started collecting, through Stakeman and others, samples of wheat,
from different parts of the world.
They had not collected the native wheats at the time when I arrived.
The Mexican wheats, yeah.
And Mexico was probably one of the first places, maybe Peru also, where wheat was introduced from the old world and later we saw some very old types which we collected.
Okay,
So these activities were going on.
The first year in 44 was the first time they made any experimental plantings on Campo Experimental, El Orno, H-O-R-N-O, which was the land of the National College of Agriculture, Chapingo, land that had not been used.
It was grown up to weeds, and so part of it was plowed and
We didn't have equipment to level with hardly any equipment.
It was miserable.